Thinking with, thinking, thinking with, thinking, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah.
You're going to feast on this one.
Conceptuality is something other than itself.
There's been a change in the image of thought.
That's what it is.
The internal structure of book.
As soon as an utterance slips from the mouth, it's divorced from the subject.
Thinking with, thinking, thinking, thinking with.
We're going to start talking about Book One of The Gay Science.
And as we talked last time, we're going to give this, this part two episodes or at least two recordings.
We'll see how we edit it down the road.
But kind of thought that, you know, Nietzsche takes quite a bit of time in The Gay Science and elsewhere, especially in The Genealogy of Morals to talk about like what it means to read an aphorism, to be able to sit with it, to ruminate on it.
And since we're considering the sort of the pedagogical orientation, both of this book and of our pedagogical orientation to potentially teaching this book, we would, John's ideas, we would experiment with doing some of that ruminating ourselves and sit on the same, the same collection of aphorisms for multiple, at least two sessions.
We'll see, we'll see, see how it goes.
So this is part one of Book One of The Gay Science.
I mean, I don't know where you guys want to start, but I can tell you the aphorism for me, it's really, really early on, that intellectual conscience one.
Mm-hmm.
And this is just reading it in that sort of identificatory way, right, like, meaning that sense of like, man, yes, that sort of like, I agree with you, that seems so right kind of way of reading Nietzsche, which, I mean, Nietzsche obviously invites a great deal.
But like, but to stand in the midst of this Rerum Concordia discourse and of this whole marvelous uncertainty and rich ambiguity of existence without questioning, without trembling with the craving and the rapture of such questioning, without at least hating the person who questions, perhaps even finding him amusing, that is what I feel to be contemptible.
And this is the feeling for which I look first in everybody.
Some folly keeps persuading me that every human being has this feeling simply because he is human.
And then the, you know, the twist, like, this is my kind of injustice, right?
Yeah.
This is what makes me into a douche.
Well, because right before that, I mean, like, effectively, he's like, look, I have this drive to, to question, undo everything.
And I assume that this is a common thing.
And I'm constantly running to people who need their sense of certainty to ground themselves.
And to the, and they're so certain about their certainty that they don't even perceive other people as a threat or something to laugh at, something to just completely ignore.
But, yeah, that, that, that being his injustice, there's like, and there's my projection and certainty that I'm, yeah.
Right.
And my certainty is like, everyone's got to have this.
And why the fuck don't they have this?
It's like, okay, I am a symptom of the very thing that I've diagnosed as the problem.
But that, I mean, each, each, each move of that, to me, that's, in terms of the identification thing, each move of that, of like, how is it that people can just accept that such and such a thing is good or bad without wondering what the fuck, and based on what calculus, what system of values, whatever.
And then the second, that second move, or the more grandiose claim, which is like, how can you live without kind of trying to give yourself an account of these things?
And then, you know, that's the more general move.
And then the final move to say, and this is me living without giving myself a general account of this particular attribute.
Right.
Like, each of those three moves are just like, it's just Nietzschean, right?
Like, it's the only way that I think of it.
Even though I just said three moves, and it sounds awfully, you know, maybe not Nietzschean.
Maybe a little Hegelian?
And look, there are a number of the passages.
I mean, obviously, the one where he talks about the in and for itself.
But there are a number of chunks here that I was just like, oh, yeah, this just sounds very, very Hegelian in the sense in which we've been talking about.
Right.
In the generous sense.
Yeah.
Yeah, I mean, just that one sentence at the end of the first paragraph here when he talks about, you know, he does not account the desire for certainty as is in most craving and deepest distress.
I mean, that's such a Hegelian point, where, and it's also a Nietzschean point, though, too.
So it's like being sort of a symptomatologist, you know, in that way, where basically every philosophical pursuit in some way is unraveled by that desire, you know.
So that desire kind of insinuates itself into every project in some way, in guarded ways, right?
Yeah, even when you're trying to unravel the certainty in one area, it almost always happens from the perspective of another certainty from somewhere else, a methodological certainty, a, you know, whatever.
Even here, a dispositional certainty of, like, I just sort of presume that everyone has this kind of drive.
So that is Hegelian understanding, right?
This, like, intolerance of uncertainty and the need to find that stabilizing ground.
You know, he sort of gets at that dynamic in a lot of these aphorisms, but especially in the third aphorism, the noble and the common.
And then also the fifth aphorism, the unconditioned duties.
Like, all over the place.
Yeah, I mean, that's something I take from Hegel, Nietzsche, and even Butler.
Butler has this little quip, and I think Bodies That Matter, where she goes, to question a presupposition is not the same as to do away with it.
Which just, it's such a neat little exposition of that central problem, where it's like, especially in contemporary theory, where we're questioning all these, you know, binary oppositions and stuff.
And that's a consistent move across every version of contemporary rhetorical theory, but that there's an assumption loaded with that, that we can maybe step past those presuppositions.
Which, for Butler and Hegel and maybe even Nietzsche, that's kind of untenable, you know, in some cases.
Installing a different kind of presupposition is the condition, right?
Right.
But I will say, I mean, back to the identificatory element, because I'm curious what you guys think about this.
Because, like, I feel as if maybe never in my life have I been participating in an exchange where I've felt like, oh my God, you're just asking too many questions, right?
Like, I've never been that guy.
Now, let me also say, there are times where I do find people's questioning tedious, but usually because it's like, well, is there a God or is there not a God?
Like, because they're pursuing questions that are really well-worn ruts, at least for me.
And so I'm bored with the line, the particular line of questioning.
But, I mean, I have never found myself in the circumstance that I know many of my friends have found themselves in.
But I don't know if you guys experience that as well.
Like, do you guys, like, who are the people who get irritated when people say, well, hold on a second.
Is it necessarily the case that, you know, Russia's claims to territorial expansion or whatever, you know, whatever it is, right?
Like, just the desire to ask the questions rather than to proceed with simply becoming informed or repeating certainty.
Yeah, I definitely, I feel like most people are like that, right?
And it's one of my, it's one of the quickest sort of like, all right, which camp do I put you in?
Do I put you in a camp where you've got pretty well-defined borders?
I know I talked to you for five minutes about X, Y, or Z, and then I don't really engage with you ever.
Or, like, are you in this camp where I know that interesting things could come out of it?
Like, what kind of energy and effort do I give you?
Like, I find, but I find, you know, the, I don't want to follow this line of questioning camp.
Like, that's a far more populous group.
In terms of myself being sick of it, have a kid.
Like, there are only so many times I can hear, which one is faster, this one or that one?
How fast is, I'm just like, seven.
Seven what, daddy?
I don't know seven.
Seven units of speed.
Yeah, obviously.
So that's it, right?
Like, I mean, there is, because I have that, I have had that as well, not in terms of the kid part of it,
but, like, I do get, like, irritated, irritatedly tired of certain lines of questioning,
but I presume because it's like, I don't, I don't find the question terribly interesting.
Right.
So, but, I mean, I don't know.
I don't know exactly what it is, but, you know, but the same thing could be said of those other folks, right?
Like, they don't find my questioning to be terribly interesting.
I'm getting this constantly with the movies that we're watching in my sci-fi class where, my God, the English majors, like, all they know how to do, or it's like, it's like their instinctive move to just be like, to begin any conversation about any movie, about how stupid it is on this, on whatever particular area that it's stupid on.
Right.
That's the safe move to make.
Yeah, we must establish our superiority.
Like, we can see through this thing, and we recognize as a Hollywood movie that it's doing all these kind of dumbass things.
Like, they have to make that move.
And I'm, I'm always like, my response to it is like, well, I don't really understand the basis for your thing is usually some assumption about directorial intention.
Like, even, it's never stated that way, but that's usually a presumption.
I was like, but why do you assume that that's what that scene is, or that's what those characters are, or whatever else?
Well, where and how do we teach students to ask questions?
I mean, I don't think they, they, they get that kind of training, you know?
I mean, and we've talked about this very, I do, I promise I have other assignments other than this one, but this one, it seems to be the most relevant to this show or this podcast where, you know, like, I have the students sort of like right through the Foucault and like right through panopticism.
And I try to tell them, like, I want you to end your, your writing with a question.
Don't presume that figuring out the question is like something that you can just do off the cusp and then, and then lay it out.
Like one, it takes time and work and effort to sit down and prepare yourself and to think through, like, what is an interesting question for this?
And then it takes time to follow it and to sort of sit with it as well.
And that is, that takes weeks and weeks to, of, I mean, for some students, it's all semester and they never figure it out.
And, you know, for other ones, it might just take a week or two, but for a good chunk of them, it's like three, four, five weeks to even see that possibility of like, there's an art to asking and responding to questions.
It's a formulating good question.
So we did in the undergraduate class, we did simulation theory, you know, the Nick Bostrom, like Elon Musk, like belief that we're living in a simulation.
And we went through the argument, unpacked it, sort of looked at its implications, et cetera, et cetera.
And then at the end, they were just like, so John, tell us, like, do you believe that we're living in a simulation?
Of course.
And, and I said, it's the same as the God question to me, like it's the exact same question and it's an uninteresting one.
So like, that's where I pulled out my apatheism, right?
Like that I'm an apatheist.
And so some of them thought that was clever because they hadn't heard that, you know, word before, but by and large, they were disappointed.
And that's to me, the big issue is that questioning as it tends to get mobilized is presumed to be followed by an answer.
Like I'm asking a question in order to get an answer, even if I have to get it from within myself or, or whatever else, but I want to have an answer.
As opposed to questioning for the sake of pursuing, just for the sake of following, thinking through, because I, I, that strikes me as a different kind of operation.
Because questions are unresolved, right?
Like they're, they're, they're not worth something in and of themselves.
It's the, you know, they're, they're, until you get the equal sign figured out, they're not worthwhile.
And I mean, this is one of the things I'm like, what do I want your questions to lead to?
Other questions, other, and then, you know, putting in brackets, other, better questions.
And by other, better questions, I mean, like ways of nuancing or mutating or altering that first question.
So that's an able, it's able to engage more or differently or find a different perspective.
And you realize like, oh, you know, my first question was presuming all of these sort of like really clumsy things.
But now I can just kind of open up and figure out the network of related questions and assumptions here.
Well, it's also, you could think just about like where your response locates you and what are the affordances of various responses.
I was thinking about this because I just taught the Yellow Wallpaper, which actually is great.
I love teaching that piece.
And the ending is, you know, notoriously ambiguous.
And I told them, I was like, listen, there's probably four to five to maybe a dozen various interpretations, literally just of what happens at the end, just of what happens.
And I was telling them like, there's obviously not one right answer.
They don't, she doesn't lay it out for you that clearly.
So what, what are the, what does a particular response or interpretation of that ending afford you for your paper?
So listen, one of them could be a feminist interpretation of the ending.
One of them could be psychological, like rooted in psychological trauma.
One of them could be supernatural, you know, so like whatever, whatever leverages you into an interesting response, you know, that's what you should lean into.
But not with the, not with some notion of like fidelity to, to the correctness of it.
Whatever that would be, I mean, because that's the case where something like, um, again, that's, that's a good example of a place in which, uh, um, the presumption of authorial intention is the arbiter of correctness, even though no one ever mentions it.
Like what else could it be, right?
Right, yeah.
What else could be, well, wait, what's the right ending?
It's like, or what really happens?
It's like, it's a feature, not a bug.
Yeah.
Right.
And it, and it seems like if there was a desire to, to make it more clear, she would have like, it would have been more clear, right?
Like, exactly.
Yeah.
But you still, you'll still have students be like, well, maybe like she did some of the, something with the rope.
And like, maybe there's something hidden in the text that can tell us the actual meaning.
So they're still trying to find like what really happened, which is kind of fun.
I mean, it's fun for them.
So go ahead and do that.
But it's not ultimately like that.
That shouldn't be the value of the exercise is like, like unearthing the essence of the text.
Like, it's totally, I mean, the kind of religious demand of reading, like the whole acrostics thing or something like that.
There's, there are secret layers of meaning hidden within this thing that will allow you to untie it.
Like that, that whole, the mysticism that's associated with that, like the word of God or author or whatever you want to substitute is like absolutely integral to our adults to understand the thing.
And which is such a weird, at least for me, it's a pretty weird thing.
Yeah.
It never makes a whole ton of sense to me.
Like, I don't think I've read like that since I was like maybe a child, you know, like, I don't know.
It just doesn't seem like, that's not the tendency that drives my, my writing or my interpreting of texts.
And it's not something I would ever encourage.
That's the drive that is driving eight out of every 10 students or nine out of every 10 students.
Right.
I mean, it's like, you know, it's a channel some height ago.
We live in a technological, like, scientific world where, you know, the drive is to find, is to unravel the knot and to find the answers.
And the only difference between answers are better and worse ones.
Better, like more or less.
Yeah.
Like, why do most students hate English?
Because there aren't clear answers like there are in math.
And by the way, it's weird that they presume that there are clear answers in math in any real interesting way.
I'll tell you what.
This is a thing for me of late is exactly what you're saying in terms of the math.
Because I, this is something so stupid.
I, I give them quizzes every day.
And it's just three questions.
And it's just sort of a, did you read the reading, view the viewing types of questions.
Right.
And what's abundantly apparent to me is the inadequacy of, so they just get a zero to three grade.
Yeah.
That's it.
But there are different threes and there are different twos and there are different ones.
Like, you know, and it's, and I'm like, I have no way of demarcating that because I've committed to a simple quantitative way.
And so there are three equals three equals three equals three.
And yet they clearly don't just in reading their quiz answers.
And these are questions that I like, you know, I have a certain facility with language and I struggle to come up with like super clear.
I'll just give you an example because I was grading quizzes right before, just a little bit ago.
And this is the week that we watched The Matrix.
And the question, the quiz question on The Matrix was what gives Neo the experience, what happens to give Neo the experience of deja vu?
Okay.
So 80, yeah, 85% of them say he sees a black cat crossing twice.
Right.
Great.
I mean, that's like, that was the conventional interpretation, whatever, whatever.
Another 10% or so will say the Matrix was reset.
Okay.
So they're actually, that's right.
I mean, they're not wrong when they say that because the, the, seeing the cat move across was a symptom that was interpreted by those others as the Matrix being reset and the glitch in the Matrix thing.
So they've just offered a deeper kind of structural explanation for, for the same phenomenon, but they're different answers.
Right.
And indicate different ways of thinking of the problem.
Now, I also had a couple of people who said, um, when he saw the white rabbit tattoo, do you remember at the beginning of the movie when on his computer screen, it says, follow the white rabbit.
And then like five minutes later, she turns and there's a white rabbit there.
Now, those are unusual answers.
That's not the majority of people, far from the majority.
And it's an unconventional kind of reading, but like, is it simply wrong?
Yeah.
Like they're like, he uses the word deja vu in the moment with the cat.
He doesn't use it in the moment with the rabbit, but that's what happens.
Yeah.
And so like giving them the benefit of the doubt that they actually watched the rest of the movie and came to that answer.
They're not like, it's an unconventional interpretation.
And what I start thinking is like, even in these simple, straightforward, direct Q&A kinds of questions that there isn't just a right and wrong.
Like it isn't, it isn't that easy.
And who cares?
It's one point on, on a quiz grade out of a hundred.
So who gives a shit, right?
Nevertheless, it's very interesting to see the different ways that people think and that the idea that these could all be equalized around the number one.
They each got a one, they each got a question right.
It's like, but not, not at all.
Like they're so vastly different.
Like if that, if the white rabbit one were followed through, you might be like, oh, this is really dumb.
Or you might follow it through and be like, holy shit, this like remakes the movie for me.
No, think about that.
That moment of deja vu is the glitch moment that initiates the very movie, right?
Yeah.
Neo is an anomaly, right?
I mean, that's a potentially interesting and generative mistake.
Yeah.
But that's what I'm just thinking in terms of the equivalence version of math.
Like I've committed, as we all do, right?
Like we commit to a certain kind of quantification.
And I find myself every single time I sit down to grades, 70 something quizzes, I find myself inevitably being like, ah, this right and wrong way that I set this up.
It's just not a very, it's not very good way.
Like it's efficient and I can get through it faster that way than like trying to figure out.
But I wish there was some way that I could indicate like qualitatively, like this person answered the structural question.
This person answered the deviant one in a deviant way.
It's just simply not conventional.
They're not wrong.
But if there was some other qualitative way that I could add to those numbers.
So to question your own type of injustice then, John, what would you, what would your reaction be to another instructor who gave the same exam, who saw that same response and without even thinking just marked it wrong?
I would say my guess is the vast majority of instructors.
Oh, yeah.
See the white rabbit response and just mark it wrong.
Yeah.
You know, and...
But what's your, but what's your, what's your response to that?
Is it like dumb motherfuckers?
No, I mean, I get it.
Like I get the economic ways in which they're treating, you know, grading.
And there are undoubtedly moments when I have that economic relationship to it too.
It's like, I don't have enough time.
I don't want to think about this.
It's just wrong.
But I always have a sense of an intellectual conscience about it.
I'm always like, I am doing an injustice by simply assigning a number to this thing.
I mean, I have that feeling in grading all the time.
And it's really why, I mean, it's why I never give quizzes.
I never ask right or wrong answers, like ever.
It really is.
And then I, like, I just have so much more flexibility over what the numbers do.
I make the numbers do what I want them to do in terms of, like, motivating students to respond.
And, you know, and, like, not, like, completely willing.
There's always an attachment to, you know, what the numbers are and what I'm, what, you know, what they wrote.
But there's, like, I steer clear of even trying to make some kind of determinant relationship.
Because then you run into, like, the problems of, like, the technicality of it.
I find myself wanting to distinguish exceptional work from just good work.
And we don't have a plus system in USC.
And so, like, but I want to give a couple people an A plus.
But there's no way to really differentiate that besides telling them specifically yours was very good.
Like, yours was one of the top papers.
Which, I mean, I can tell them that.
But there's no way to quantify that in our grade system.
I do love that with our grading system.
I mean, it does just give me more nuance, too.
Because our department cares a lot more about grades and having some kind of variance.
And so, like, you know, giving a C is able to do different kind of work for me than it would elsewhere or D or whatever else.
Because it actually happens.
But we also have the plus system.
And it's very deliberately supposed to be super rare.
Like, I might have, I might go an entire semester without a single person getting an A plus, you know, in a class.
And then, and so, you know, like, I do feel like I'm marking some kind of real distinction when someone just knocks it out of the park.
I've also had, like, classes where, like, two or three people got an A plus.
And my God, are those fun classes to teach.
But don't you guys have the same experience that I'm talking about, which is a failure of equivalence, right?
Like, or the inadequacy of equivalence, like, at the level of the grade.
Like, whatever the grade is, whatever it is.
Yeah.
You're just like, okay, this is a B student, and that's a B student.
That's a B student?
Yeah.
I mean, I don't understand how this is that.
Like, it just doesn't really, like, seriously make sense to me.
Because there are B students that get it entirely through industry.
It's like, they didn't turn, they turned everything in on time.
Everything was, you know, sort of formatted correctly.
You know, there was, like, they were there.
They, you know, participated.
And then there's the person who's the B student who's much more sort of, like.
Who was the A student but didn't do the work.
Yeah, exactly.
Right?
And, yeah, like, yeah, you're right.
No two B students.
I mean, you can typify and you can kind of create subdivisions.
But even within then, there are, you know, inadequacies.
Right.
Or the people who slipped for a couple of weeks, right?
Like, I think that's something.
Yeah.
What do you do with them?
Like, I don't know.
I don't have a sense of equivalencies with which I'm comfortable to be able to say, this
thing is like that thing.
Even at the A level, the same thing is true.
Right?
Like, it doesn't matter what level we're talking about and what grade.
But just my inability to really believe in the equivalencies between these is what makes
me so uncomfortable and what makes me so uncomfortable with grades.
It's like, I mean, I think I can say things like, well, this is good or this has promise
or this is like, I can kind of descriptors.
But as far as getting any kind of quantitative hierarchical feedback, like, I don't, like, I'm not sure
that this is better than that.
This is weirder than that or this is more out there than that or this is a less conventional
way of reading this thing than that thing.
Well, I've also, because I'm so invested in how students engage the text, the how of the engagement
and, like, you know, I'm perfectly comfortable with using very sort of probably frustratingly
ambiguous language.
Like, you are taking on the position of the master in a relationship to this text in your
effort to explain it.
And I want you to take on a position of hesitancy and exploration, act as if it is a, and I'm
like, you know, like, I can, fortunately, I haven't had any student, like, react supposably
to that kind of language and, like, be like, Dean, you know, how does, how can this be sort
of kept consistent across the board?
I'm like, no way, no, in no way can it, can it be.
And yet it is so much more effective, like so much more powerful for me to use that kind
of language.
I never, I very rarely say, unless if it's good, I never say it's bad.
I never say this is better than that.
Unless if it's in relationship to their stuff, like you really let go.
You, you were like way, this is way better because you were more patient.
You allowed yourself to sit on this thing.
You allowed yourself to like break this thing down and, and, you know, you're allowed to
like make yours, make these kinds of connections that you weren't able to do before.
So like for you, this is better.
Right.
But then I never feel like I have to compare it to other students, which is nice.
Yeah.
I feel like I reward curiosity a lot in the classroom and just effort too.
It's like, even if they're not adept writers, if they're trying, like if they're reading my
comments and they, they've made a good faith effort at attending to them and making those
changes, I'm like.
But that's a, but that's a good example of, of a very, very common problem.
You have on the one hand, the student who has a great facility with language, but doesn't
really exert very much effort.
On the other hand, you have the one who's just not as good of a writer, but really tries
really hard.
And the idea that they're the same grade or the same, I mean, again, I'm not saying one's
better than the other.
I don't know which one is better than the other one, but like the notion of an equivalence
that something like our grading system sets up just, it just doesn't seem.
But it also depends on what you see the function of the grade and the class as doing.
If it's a, if it's purely a gatekeeping function, if it's purely a, like, did you achieve a certain
level of mastery of something, then I'd have a different orientation to it.
But I try to minimize that as much as possible that, you know, like my job isn't to ensure
that you have learned a handful of things.
My job is to ensure, or not even ensure, is to make it possible for you to engage something
unfamiliar and, you know, and so like, if that's actually the goal of the class, yeah.
So if that's actually the goal of the class, then that makes grading both in terms of like
what kind of successes it's marking and in terms of like the function of it different than,
you know, making sure that you've gotten over some kind of subject knowledge threshold.
You've gotten your threshold concepts down.
But it's hard when you're at, at least for me.
I mean, and maybe this is just me being whiny, but like, I got 70 students this semester.
Oh yeah, you can't do it with 70.
No fucking way.
I mean, I didn't mean to get us onto the grading thing, but that, but look, in many ways, that's
an example in terms of the intellectual consciousness thing.
It's like my discomfort in feeling like I need to have an account for this practice that
I engage in literally like multiple times a week, just grading fricking quizzes.
Yeah.
But I mean, the grading thing fits what we're talking about here on, on two lines, both in
terms of the intellectual consciousness or conscience that I'm just trying to be like,
how do I grapple with this tool that I'm using to like make life livable in some kind of way?
But then also that, that drive to find the certainty that, to find the grounds on which
you can, can stabilize life.
And you know, what you're kind of like getting at is that, you know, for you, that equivalency
making model, that mathematical quantifying model that gives a lot of people certainty fundamentally
unnerves you.
It really does.
Right.
And that should be the thing that should make me feel better.
Well, to me, that, that drive for certainty always leads to, to stress and anxiety for,
for grad students, for undergrads.
Like when you're trying to comprehend a text, you're not going to be able to, especially if
it's difficult, you're not going to be able to fully comprehend something on the first go.
And so I've always stressed like a sort of sampling approach or like a kind of mosaic approach.
Like if you can key into certain moments and leverage them for, for your writing, that's really
all you need to do.
And that's not based on a telos of certainty and comprehension.
That's the other reason I teach Foucault for my first year students.
I'm like, look, I'm teaching you the hardest thing I possibly can out of this textbook because
I know no one's understanding it.
Like that's the point, you know?
And so if, if you feel like, oh, there are a bunch of smarter people in here that can understand
it and I'm dumb.
No, I promise you no one in this, no one in this room is understanding this.
I don't pretend, you know, I think it's dangerous when I pretend like I understand it.
But I, even at the basic levels, no one in this room is right now.
So that's, know that that's what I want you to sit with.
You're not failing by not understanding it.
And another tactic for that, that I have kind of happened on in the course of teaching
these classes is teaching bad movies.
Like, you know, we did this movie Splice that's, it's just a bad movie, but there's a lot of
interesting elements to it.
So once you get over the fact that it's a bad movie and it forces them to kind of be like,
okay, and especially with the majors, the majors had to spend 10 minutes in their responses
like saying like, here's why it's bad.
Here's why it's bad.
And it is.
And like next week we're doing RoboCop, another bad movie, right?
But interesting things happen in there.
Like once you get rid of this, that the goal of reading is to come up with a global judgment
of the value of the thing.
It's like our heritage of like our, our inheritance from new criticism.
It's like, my God, could we do something else?
Can we think in relation to the things that we read?
And, you know, they all did the same kind of thing with the Splice thing that I did a
couple of weeks ago.
And I was like, okay, so you guys all agree that Splice is a bad movie.
So fucking what?
Now, what can we talk about and think about in relation to Splice?
Like, set that whole thing aside.
And they, because it was so overt and explicit, they were able to do it.
They're like, okay, we're not going to bother with the, I don't like this, or this is so cheesy,
or it's bad acting, or it's bad, whatever.
Like, it's just like, okay, here's what's interesting about the thing.
So, oddly enough, we had really interesting conversations about the bad movies, you know?
So, interestingly, that seems to be exactly what's happening in that third aphorism on the
noble and the common.
Like, it's, it's a very interesting take on the noble and the common, is that the common
is the tyrannical thing, right?
It, like, he talks about the sort of the, the experience of the common feeling as if the
noble has some kind of superiority to him that has some kind of better version of the common
sense that they have, of this sort of, like, strategic thinking that they have, and they're
going to get outmaneuvered.
And then they kind of realize, oh, no, they don't actually seem to, like, have or even
care to have this thing.
Aren't there, aren't they idiots?
And then the, the inversion that, that Nietzsche makes, uh, sort of, like, halfway through is
to say that the cool thing about, like, the common is, reduces all possible passion, all
possible singularity to the instrumental, instrumentalization of some kind of strategic thinking.
The interesting thing about the noble is that it's able to set aside reason, set aside a
certain kind of sense, and allow oneself to be dominated by a passion to sort of, like,
I mean, I think of, um, uh, Deleuze's commentary on, on Nietzsche of, like, learning to obey, learning
to, to, like, learning to be appropriated and taken off in some, like, uh, uh, singular idiosyncratic
direction, or the, is the language that he uses in this aphorism.
The high, the, the higher nature's taste is for exceptions.
Right.
And just to not only think of it, what is it, instrumentally, as you said, but also as, like,
you know, with an eye to an advantage or an eye to positioning myself.
Yeah.
Because that's how I often hear, especially the, the majors' criticisms, it's like, it's
the, I'm smarter than this thing.
Yes.
Oh, yeah.
Um, and it's like, okay, let's just,
start from the place that you're smarter than this thing.
Now, what can we, you know, now what can we do?
Like, that's, and especially because it was so perfumed, like, it was, everyone was doing
it.
You know, there was nobody, no one was saying, like, I actually thought it was a really interesting
movie.
Like, not one person.
Yeah.
Because it's not.
It's dangerous.
That's a, that's a dangerous, vulnerable position to put yourself in, because.
But it's fun.
As a teacher, I get to be the one who can do that.
And they'd be like, look, this is fucking genius.
What?
Like, he's supposed to be the smart guy.
Why?
So what, what did that conversation look like then?
Because you said it got more interesting after you had already established that the movie sucked
or whatever.
So like, was it, were you talking about the content of the movie after that or like the
structure?
The ethic.
We weren't talking about it as a movie, like in terms of how it's made and the parts and
the characters.
We weren't.
We were just like keying in on moments, kind of like what we're doing right now.
Just keying in on moments like, oh, I thought this scene was really interesting and how it
related to this other scene.
And it raised questions of genetic engineering ethics.
And there's this other, well, think about the sort of way that the corporate voice comes
in and, and how that complicates the desire to just, you know, learn more or whatever.
So it just became this like hooking into moments and connecting them to other moments in, in
both in plot and character, even visually, like they even were taking it.
And I do recall at least one student said at the very end, this is one of the haters,
early haters was like, well, shit, now I don't know if it's a bad movie.
Good.
You did some good work.
Yeah.
That was exactly the point, right?
Like, is that there are ways of engaging these things.
And I don't know that it would work with, with fiction because they have a kind of default
affection or affinity for writing.
I think video is better because you watch these kinds of movies and you're just like,
this is so obviously a bad, a bad movie.
Like, um, and then there's a lot that's really interesting.
And if you follow that road out in conjunction with other folks thinking through it, you don't
know if it's a bad movie anymore.
That was a good move Nathaniel just made of like, he just did a fantastic instrumental
connection of the non-instrumental.
It's like, you're turning us to our thing that we're here to do.
That was, well, I'm going to take us further away potentially for a moment, but, um, I had
a similar experience when I taught, uh, sorry to bother you.
I don't know if you guys have seen that.
It's on Netflix.
It's, it's, uh, I don't even really know how to describe it.
It's a, it's a creepy dystopian movie where this guy, um, uh, I could have, I could have
because the music was all menacing and disturbing.
So, I, did you write this, did you write this music sending us after watching the movie?
Well, yeah, sequentially.
Yes.
Chronologically.
Yeah.
But he was writing this music beforehand.
Um, the movie itself was solid half of it.
And then the next half was really bad.
That was kind of, that was the general consensus between me and all my students was that, oh,
it started out promising.
And then it kind of jumped the shark towards the end.
But I found a similar thing where it was like, and this was just my, it wasn't even based
on their reading.
My interpretation changed based on interfacing with the movie just because I had to teach
it.
So initially, right, initially I was like, ah, a lot of this stuff is a little heavy handed,
the political message.
And, you know, so I was critiquing it on the first run, but then on the second run, when
I'm really getting into the details of certain scenes, certain moments, you start to see stuff
that's like almost revelatory where you're like, wow, the composition of this.
And it doesn't have to do with the intention necessarily of the director.
It's like this moment says so many things about the different trajectories of the movie.
And you wouldn't see that unless you were, you had to teach it.
You know what I mean?
So it's like, unless you had that attention.
Oh, yeah.
But that's, it's something about disconnecting it from like, again, like a value judgment.
It's like the default ways in which we encounter works is coming up with a global judgment.
I liked it.
It was great.
It sucked.
I hated it.
Right.
Like it's always, it's always about that.
And then all of the discussions then are support points for those value judgment opinions,
as opposed to, you know, when you, when you just start with a moment, you're like, okay.
And you connect it to another moment or whatever, whatever.
It's not about the work.
It's just about like idiosyncratic, you know, moments and ways that they spawn thinking in
other directions.
And it's like, we're not really talking about the movie anymore.
We're using the movie as a way to think.
As a catalyst.
I mean, I, I don't even think, I mean, I just think that's all language, all like, you
know, that's only in direction only, never actually talking about the thing that you're
talking about.
Right.
But I mean, it's, it makes a big difference to be able to, and again, I mean, it's not like
It doesn't sneak back into the subsequent conversations, but to be able to disconnect
it from, you know, that sense that your goal in talking about the first book of Nietzsche
is to decide whether it's good or bad, what's good or bad about it and what you like or don't
like or whatever.
Like it doesn't have to be that, you know, it can end up with a conversation about grades
for God's sake.
The way that Nietzsche diagnoses reactions, like various reactions, philosophically, traditionally,
et cetera, is so useful.
Cause I mean, it's sort of like your reaction to a movie or to a book that says something
about you, not necessarily about the book.
And Nietzsche says this exact thing.
And one of these aphorisms here where it's like, when you get sick of a, of an object or
a possession of yours, that's because you're sick of yourself in relation to the thing.
It's not, it has not, it has virtually nothing to do with an external object or apparatus that
you're using.
It has to do with your relation to yourself changing.
Yeah.
He's effectively making that, that, um, that sort of possessive style of love argument,
um, and critiquing it.
And then he, but then he also makes the Phaedrus move at the very end.
You know, he's like here and there on earth, there's probably a kind of, uh, continuation
of love in which this greedy desire of two people for each other gives way to a new desire
and greed, a shared higher thirst for an ideal above them.
But who knows such love?
Uh, who has experienced it?
Its true name is friendship.
Like that's definitely the Phaedrus move, right?
Definitely.
It does relate to the noble and the common thing there, right?
Like the common is that sense of playing through the advantage.
Yeah.
Desire as a desire.
To have.
Yeah.
And that, that, that, that nobler, higher form, friendship form is, is what, it's not
really about a possession.
Right.
It's a, it's about the transformation.
It's the, you know, I mean, in many ways, the same way that we've been talking about the
movie, the language, like that impulse to say like, all right, to evaluate it.
Is it good?
Is it bad?
You know, like what is it's con?
Yeah.
Put the stamp on the content, you know, what, what is it's worth?
Where does it belong?
And then the move that you've been kind of talking about, it's like, no, now use it as
a catalyst for connecting to other two as, as a way of, you know, refracting thought
into something else to make it sort of, you know, like different.
It's a network or a real set of relays of, of, you know, relationships that suddenly like
animate thought in a different kind of way.
Right.
And, you know, that's exactly the sort of thing that's going on with this version of love is
like, you know, this desire for, you know, for something that looks like it could just
be for like carnal possession or, you know, domination of the soul.
Suddenly that same machinery gets animated for something very different.
And, you know, it's, it's funny that you say that because I also, and I didn't, haven't
been obsessed with the Thedrus, uh, for the last six months, but I thought that as well.
I was like, as I was reading it, I was like, well, geez, this is only the negative lower
version from the Thedrus.
What about the higher version?
Yeah.
He gets there at the very, at the very end.
Like there's something else.
There's another spirit that animates this as well.
It's not about possession and it's not about like knowing an object and stamping.
And so like, and, you know, in my Thedrus piece, you know, like, I mean, I try to connect
that to writing itself and be like, look, there's a possessive orientation to writing that treats
writing as a kind of, as containers of knowledge or content or whatever else.
And then there's this more inventive erotic kind of thing.
And, you know, sort of like where it says like, and I'm pro, you know, team erotic, you
know, like, uh, inventive arrows, inventive writing.
But it's these last couple of lines of both, um, the second and the third aphorism, you know,
this is my type of injustice.
And then, then also at the end of, um, like the last quarter-ish of the third aphorism on
the noble and the common, and, you know, it's, he's, after he's described the sort of this,
you know, the noble as being the one who's able to allow the passions to overtake him and,
and sort of remake him and like become sort of singular and then sort of departed from
the common, and then the, so this is like, well, I don't, this is the last, maybe like
four or five lines.
It is very rare that a higher nature has enough reason left over to understand and treat commonplace
people as what they are.
Above all, it believes in its own passion as something that is present in everyone, but
concealed.
And this belief is the full, full of ardor and eloquence.
Now, when such exceptional people do not themselves feel like exceptions, how can they ever understand
the common nature and arrive at a proper estimate of the rule?
And so they too speak of the stupidity, expedience, and fancifulness of humanity, stunned that the
world is taking such an insane course and that it will not commit itself to the which is needful.
This is the eternal injustice of the noble.
And in many ways, it's sort of like created a general, specific relationship to what, to the previous
injustices.
Like, here's my injustice.
Here's my idiosyncrasy.
Here's my singularity.
And it's my injustice.
And by the way, this production of these kinds of injustices are not unique to me and are not unique to this
style of injustice that you can imagine an entire array of these injustices, an entire array of this feeling of like, how is it that, you know, everyone doesn't have this sort of intellectual
conscience or this other fill in the blank, you know, sort of idiosyncratic passion.
That's what defines, I mean, it's like, I mean, it's in my translation, this is the eternal injustice.
Yeah.
My translation, this is the eternal injustice of the noble.
Yeah, I mean, it's like, that's the condition is unjust in sort of the supposition, like that they're behaving.
So it's, it's both a reversal and an underwriting of the terrain, too.
Yeah.
It's a deconstructive, if we want to say that.
But it is that, it is the, the, um, the imposition of this, of the singular, of the idiosyncratic onto the more common body, right?
Which makes it unjust.
It has no foundation.
It has no rationale or reason why, you know, the common ought to be this or that way.
It just forces itself upon it.
It's just a projection.
Like, it should be that way.
What the heck is wrong with it?
Yeah.
And even if, like, you think it should be this way or don't think it should be this way, just the exercise of that will, just the exercise of that force, does that work?
Whether you're sort of, like, okay with it or not.
I think this problem is strange today, though, because I feel like it's marketable to be anti-establishment.
And I'm not even, I don't even know.
I'm talking about specific, like, sort of social media personas and maybe people you're not familiar with.
But, um, the whole anti-woke movement, you know, like, with a lot of podcasts, the kind of, like, Rogan people, like, people affiliated with that, they all assume they're adopting that noble, that position of nobility, where they're, they're talking to the, they're talking about the common, right?
And, like, how are people, like, infested with this woke mind virus and shit like that?
So there's this assumption of being sort of above, uh, the common people, which is marketable.
But what none of them seem to realize is that they're just marketing that to a bunch of idiots, you know?
So it's just, like, it's just different milieus of thinking you're superior to other people.
But they're also kind of pushing the, like, for them, it seems, in my experience, it's much more like this should be obvious, you know?
Not like my circumstances, like, people have these sort of, you know, intersections where they arrive at, you know, a moment of a crisis of conscience, you know, by quantifying things.
It's much more of, like, no, this is the obvious advantage.
This is the obvious, like, common, this is what is commonsensical, is to look this way.
And these people, like, by calling it the woke virus, it's very obviously a conservative move.
It is the, it is the, uh, um, the antibody response to, you know, the newness of the woke is, you know, whether or not rightness is actually all that new or not.
I was going to say the newness, like, when I was younger, it was called political correctness.
Like, this has been going on my whole life.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
So this idea that there's this recent surge of interest.
Yeah, it's hilarious.
There's finally a backlash by white people.
It's like, no, there's always been.
As long as I've been alive.
Oh, yeah.
Yeah.
Rush Limbaugh.
Yeah, I mean, so it's.
Right, but people are pitching it like it's new.
I know.
Right, they're like, I have access to reality.
Nobody else is grounded in reality, but my reality is the right one.
And if you follow this, you'll have the answers.
And it's like.
Look, I mean, honestly, to me, a lot of the, and I don't pay a ton of attention, but a lot of the problem with the discussions,
but a little bit that I dip into it in various social medias is that everyone on every position thinks that they're the right one.
And nobody is saying, hey, hold on.
Believing that you're the right one might, or that your position is correct or accurate, that actually might be the real problem.
Right?
Like, the source of the problem is it doesn't matter whether you're woke or anti-woke.
Believing that you're right and you know the solution to race issues or the proper way of being, whatever.
Like, that is, you know, to me, the larger question that doesn't ever come up.
And a lot of that, just like, you know, whether you're woke or anti-woke, just the sort of hubris that is involved in pretending like you can tell the difference.
Yeah, right.
I mean, well, and that they are one thing, right?
Like, yeah, I mean, I'm constantly, I mean, I presume that I would be in the, like, problem, problematic woke people side from most of the people with whom I interact.
But I don't know what it means.
Like, I don't have any, like, it's one of those wonderful, like, political.
I get interpolated that way all the time.
But, yeah, I don't know, you know, it's like I don't recognize the box that I've been put in half the time.
Right.
But it's the same issue as the category of race, too, right?
Like, I mean, it plays out the same way.
It's like, oh, there's one thing called being black in America?
Yeah.
Wait a second.
I think I'm one of those, but I don't recognize this supposedly sort of, like, pan-blackism, right?
Right, right.
So, I mean, it's, I don't know.
I mean, and I have to say, like, I don't know the Joe Rogan thing, like, at all.
I really don't.
Yeah, I don't either.
I've never listened to it.
I've never really known.
The only way that I really encountered is through students who say they have listened to Joe Rogan in this, you know, and they're always insipid.
And all, you know, so I don't know if he's insipid or not.
Actually, Rogan's not really the best because he is a little more.
He can be funny.
He can be kind of nuanced.
But it's the people that associate with him.
So it's all the little Rogan heads, Roganites.
And there's people who are much more conservative that latch on to that kind of ethos.
You know what I mean?
So it's more, it's more, but who cares?
I took it, I mean, again, I don't know, but I took it, I took him to be like this guy who just wants to question stuff that's, I mean, that's my sense.
But now, also, obviously, with some of the Sandy Hook thing, like, I feel like he didn't have a sense of his, you know, like, by having a person on the show, you're validating that perspective.
And I think that, and I can imagine how a person could miss that.
Like, I can imagine him being like, look, I'm not advocating for this thing.
I'm just simply saying it's worth engaging.
It's like, yeah, but then you're kind of advocating for its value as even being worth engaging.
And that's a problem.
Right.
Which I think he, as far as I can tell, apologized for.
And he was like, I was willing to have.
So my general sense is the thing that this guy offers is, like, let's question received opinions about things, which strikes me as generally a good thing.
Like, again, there can be, you know, relentless sort of suspiciousness of all things that gets a little bit.
You know, paranoid, you know, but nevertheless, like that general sense of, well, let's, let's actually go learn about it from an expert who I'm going to have as my guest on the show or something like that.
Again, I don't.
Let's just say, let's just say for the record that we all don't like Rogan because that's the smart thing to say for most people listening.
I mean, I honestly did not know that.
I just, that's what I'm saying.
Yeah.
We don't like Joe Rogan.
None of us, the three of us do not like him.
I have never heard anything about him from someone else that makes me think I would like him.
So there's that.
I actually like him, but I'm not allowed to say that.
You're not allowed to say it.
So we have to cut that out.
We have to cut that out.
Yeah.
But I'm telling you, like, the only way I really encountered is, like, student responses in this class where they're like, well, I watched this podcast or whatever by Joe Rogan who said this, this, this, this.
People who are super into him, you have to watch out for, for sure.
For sure.
Because he has said a lot of stupid shit, like with the vaccine and stuff.
I mean, he said some wild stuff about the, you know, how nobody needs the vaccine if you're under a certain age and healthy.
He's like, don't fucking get it.
So it's nothing like that.
You're like, okay, well, we can't.
Yeah.
You can't really endorse.
I have a sense of responsibility.
Like, because I also understand.
Yeah.
There's part of me that's a little bit sympathetic to those kind of grandiose hyperbolic claims because they're funny.
But it sounds like he doesn't mean that it's funny.
It sounds like he's funny.
Well, sometimes he does.
Okay.
Like, there's, there are moments where he'll, he'll say something that's an obvious joke.
And the way that the media works now is there's all these little like hawks out that just look for sound bites.
And then they write a whole article that then goes viral.
And then people get outraged over something that Rogan said when it was clearly just like some offhand joke with another comedian, you know?
So that's how the whole, but sometimes he does say stupid shit.
And sometimes it is dangerous.
Does he fashion himself as a comedian?
Yeah.
He's always been, yeah.
He tours around the world.
Yeah.
He's a standup comedian.
Okay.
So it's all just, he just, everything coming out of his mouth for the most part, it's just bullshit jokes.
Yeah.
You know, but.
He's, he's not like the Jordan Peterson incel type, is he?
I mean, he's not.
No, no.
I think.
No, it's not like men's rights shit.
No, no.
He makes fun of that shit, I think.
Yeah.
So Peterson's a whole other, we, we should do an episode like where we just try to deal with Jordan Peterson.
I tried watching that debate between Peterson and Zizek and I got through like 25 minutes and I turned it off.
And I, it was the best decision.
I've never had a desire to go back and finish it.
No.
Yeah.
And then there's no reason to watch it.
The only thing that I picked up on it was how much cheering there was in the audience for both Peterson and Zizek.
And it was like, they just really wanted to watch.
Yeah.
They really wanted to watch the representative of their, their, their gladiator beat up on the other one.
Right.
It was like watching WWE.
Well, okay.
So to bring this, this conversation back to Nietzsche, the Joe Rogan, Peterson, Roganites, whatever other idiots or quasi idiots or potentially interesting, but generally misinterpreted, whatever, whatever categories we're going to create for these people.
What about those initial, um, uh, aphorisms about the sort of the, the will of the preservation of the species, the sort of like, there's literally nothing you could do to harm the species.
And when I was reading this, I thought, well, climate change, you know, that was my one sort of like, could that be the thing that stands, but like, you know, I really liked this, you know, like both the sort of, you know, civilized society sort of like puts passions to sleep.
And it doesn't matter how stupid or evil or interesting or genius, you know, the evil is that comes in the, when, which we, I think we could just call the, the passion, the idiosyncrasy, the singularity of some noble soul, whatever, like whatever it is.
You know, at minimum, it reawakens those passions, even if they're defensive or what they're almost always defensive, right?
Um, at least it would reawakens those things.
And those are like, it doesn't matter what the evil is.
It couldn't harm them.
Here's an interesting case study.
Is Jordan Peterson bad, right?
Is Joe Rogan bad from this perspective, from the perspective of, you know, like the, like, I mean, I think I've answered the question.
He's not interesting for me, which is why I, you know, I've literally never listened to five words that Joe Rogan has put together.
And, you know, I, I actually, one of the few regrets I have in my life is listening to Jordan Peterson talk for 15 minutes on, in that debate.
Well, I, yeah.
Well, I feel like the lesson, at least from that first, um, aphorism is that we could do with them or without them.
It wouldn't matter.
There, there would probably be a replacement.
It's just the fact is that any given disposition, um, evil or not has in some way led to the preservation of our species and we'll, we'll continue to do so.
So even if Jordan Peterson is outright an evil human being leading people to lead evil or misguided lives, I think from the, the sort of little mini thesis statement there, it's basically like those tendencies actually have led to our survival.
So, right, like resentment, uh, revenge, all those dynamics that Nietzsche critiques, he also argues that those are what have led to civilization kind of thriving, at least in the modern sense.
Well, so like, look at the, so the end of the, the, the last bit of the first aphorism, every time the hero, the tragic hero, the one that sort of gives this new sort of certainty, uh, um, to, to, you know, a people, anytime, uh, every time the hero appeared on the stage, something new was attained.
The gruesome counterpart of laughter, that profound shock that many individuals feel at the thought, yes, living is worth it.
Yes, I am worthy of living life and I, uh, and you and all of us became interesting to ourselves once again for a while.
There was no denying that in the long run, each of these great teachers of a, of a purpose was vanquished, vanquished by laughter, reason, and nature.
The brief tragedy always changed and returned into the eternal comedy of existence and the waves of uncontrollable laughter to cite Aeschylus and, uh, must in the end come crashing down on the greatest of those tragedians.
Despite all this corrective laughter, human nature on the whole has surely been altered by the recurring emergence of such teachers of the purpose of existence.
Um, and okay, let's not pretend like Jordan Peterson or Joe Rogan are like great teachers of the, the, the existence of life, but like for some people they are right.
I mean, yeah, I mean, yeah, I mean, how many people, you know, say, yes, living is worth it.
Yes, I am worth, worthy of living, you know, in response to Peterson actually makes me think of a, of a comment.
So here's a shout out, Ryan, uh, of like, you know, someone who has listened to a lot of Peterson and someone who was quite critical of the vast majority of things that he says.
And then yet he says, I find that Peterson has a certain function for certain people.
Like, like there is a certain, certain kind of person who listens to Peterson and listens to the, you know, get out of bed.
I only know Peterson said this because Nate, you said it on a previous episode, you know, make your bed, you know, shower, like, like that sort of almost like, yeah.
Like almost like martial orientation to life that has been laughed at and, you know, needfully, like, like importantly laughed at.
But the laughter that has liberated a whole lot of people from a certain kind of tyranny of life has also for another kind of person has, has like made life not worth living.
And so like, does, you know, like this, I don't know, like, is there a value, is it valuable because it's valuable to a certain kind of person?
Is it valuable because it becomes something to laugh at?
Is it valuable because it reawakens passions?
I mean, it's just like, I mean, from the perspective of life, which is a perspective that none of us have.
Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah.
And that's one of the things that he offered, like, right at the very beginning is like, from the perspective of life, these things just, they flow, they shift, they move directions, whatever.
Like, from the perspective, the fact that we all dismiss this kind of thing is because it doesn't encourage a kind of life that we want to encourage.
The fact that we think about teaching the way we do is we're trying to think of a noble education, right?
Like, educating that sort of noble disposition, again, involve whatever problems with the word noble, but like, that's the kind, the kind of life that we are.
We're invested in the problem of life from our own disposition, not from life's disposition.
Right.
And that's where, that's where the beginning, to me, I mean, I love that, like, there's a possible future for laughter.
Yeah.
And a possible alliance of laughter with wisdom, which perhaps only the Gay Science will remain.
To laugh at oneself, as one would have to laugh, in order to laugh out of the whole truth.
To do that, even the best so far lacks sufficient sense for the truth, and the most gifted had too little genius.
Even laughter may yet have a future.
I mean, when the proposition, the species is everything, one is always none, has become part of humanity, and the ultimate liberation and irresponsibility has become accessible to all at all times.
I love, like, that sense of irresponsibility is his version of individual autonomy, right?
Yeah.
That's an unusual conjunction of values.
Because of the unimportance of individual autonomy in relationship to the species, right?
That's right, right?
Like, so perhaps laughter will then have formed an alliance with wisdom.
Perhaps only Gay Science will then be laughed.
And, I mean, as an articulation of that sort of, I mean, think of it, Deleuze talks about it in terms of the innocence of the child, right?
Is the stage of the child.
It's like, that's this blind irresponsibility to laugh at oneself out of a sense of the whole truth, which is like, I mean, everything is permitted, right?
I mean, there are consequences, I mean, there are consequences, I mean, there are mistakes, you know, but it's like, that's, that's sort of, at least for me, an incredibly invigorating sense of individual irresponsibility, you know, irrespective of it.
From the perspective of life, right?
Which, you know, like he has the later aphorism about, you know, views from a distance, you know, from a distance.
This is aphorism 15.
And it's like, right, life as the mountain, you know, makes everything look, you know, pretty beautiful.
And then I'm going to go climb Mount Life, I'm going to get up there and like, fuck, this kind of sucks from up here.
Like, this is a great perspective for life, but I am clearly not just life.
This is boring.
This thing moves on the level of eons and mass slaughter and bloodletting.
And, you know, I'm going to come back down to my little, you know, cave.
But back to the first aphorism, though, it seems that they're very distinctly like two kinds of laughter, right?
There's the, like, the laughter of the Gay Science, the laughter of this laughter that has allied itself with wisdom is not a corrective laughter.
It's not, it's not the laughter at the teacher of the purpose of existence, right?
Like, there's that kind of ebb and flow, you know, launch, like the teacher of the purpose of existence,
provides a certainty that allows people to latch onto it and provide purpose for life, right?
It gives that kind of confidence.
And then the corrective laughter looks at it and be like, what fucking dumb shits?
You believed in God?
All of you people died for God, right?
And then, you know, but at a certain point, that's healthy for life up to a certain point.
But it becomes sickly for life if it slips into nihilism, I guess nihilism, right?
And you need that return of a kind of, you know, a purpose of life.
But this laughter at the self, the laugh at the whole truth, it's almost like a laughter at myself in the delight of needing that certainty and the absurdity of that.
Like, can I delight in the necessity and the absurdity of the certainty that I seek?
And which seems to also, I mean, for me, this is always the wrinkle that I want to add on to it.
Yeah, the wrinkle I always want to add on to it.
And, like, the beauty and the tragedy of allowing that certainty to become another certainty, to become, like, right?
You know, that seems to be the difference between that, that gay laughter, that, or the Gay Science, and by the way, not saying then that the Gay Science is better than, you know, the corrective laughter, right?
You wouldn't be laughing if you were saying that Gay Science was better.
Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah.
It would just, that would just be your certainty.
Right, I think that all that you say is, like, that's a tune I can dance to, or I want to learn how to dance to.
Like, I want to live, I mean, that's for me, you know, I've told you guys in terms of this book, like, I want to live like that.
I aspire to that level of irresponsibility, and I make, like, you know, little steps along the way, you know, there's still too much that seems heavy, right?
Like, and I don't know how to, you know, jujitsu it yet.
Right, yeah, right.
Because we can't live from the perspective of life.
We can only live from the perspective of the kind of life that we are.
But is the goal then to eventually, like, not access, but reach on that same sort of frequency, life?
Like, is that the goal of the overman or the breakthrough?
Like, the sort of liberation from the human as opposed to of the human, you know?
My guess would be, like, the kind of, I mean, that's where the overman, I don't think the overman's like a leader, you know?
No.
It's like, the overman will come and everyone will follow.
It's like, no, the overman's popping up in various ways.
He's just there.
Right.
He's probably just alone.
Well, this Gay Science is in some ways just the over, is the overman.
Because the Gay Science would be the, to render it the way that I said before, to sort of, like, delight in both the corrective laughter and the reason for existence.
And to sort of, I mean, to affirm that would be to affirm one's own self-overcoming, right?
To say, here's my certainty, here's my laughter at my certainty.
And their conjunction is its own self-mutation, its own self-becoming.
That's, that is the overcoming of man.
That is literally the overcoming of man.
Now, it's not some conscious thing that I can do or become.
Like, I can't, you know, I don't become the overman.
But that's certainly, like, a dynamic or another name for it would just be the eternal return.
Like, in Zarathustra, the terminology is always, like, your dream should be to give birth to the overman.
It's never about being the overman.
It's about giving birth to it.
And especially in this context, there are a number of different passages that maybe we can look at next time.
But where he's like, look, the inheritors of things are way more important than the things themselves.
Where it's like the grandparents, it's like.
Yeah, I love that.
And the grandchildren, too.
And oftentimes, the grandchildren are, like, what he sees as the inheritors of a particular disposition.
That disposition looks really different in the grandchildren than it is in the parents.
So it's like, you don't even know what things, you know, are going to be taken up as your disposition.
That's what, you know, the unconscious instinct stuff.
You need a geology of morals, not a biology of morals in some ways, right?
Yeah.
Just that, you know, like, this shit moves slow.
Right.
Yeah.
Prehistory as the longest and most important stage of human development, to put it in, you know, Nietzsche's terms.
But, like, there's another passage in the first aphorism.
It's only, like, maybe ten lines down on the very first one.
And this is sort of, like, what we've already been talking about.
But there's a trick about, you know, like, hatred doesn't hurt or evil doesn't hurt the human.
In fact, it's probably good in a certain kind of way in terms of preserving the species.
But there's a twist here that I kind of want to focus on.
Hatred, delight in the misfortunes of others, the lust to rob and rule, and whatever else is called evil, all belong to the amazing economy of the preservation of the species.
An economy which is certainly costly, wasteful, and on the whole, most foolish, but still proven to have preserved our race so far.
I no longer know whether you, my dear fellow man and neighbor, are even capable of living in a way that is damaging to the species.
But it's about the inefficient, this inefficient economy.
Like, and not just, like, it's not just that, oh, well, it's been inefficient and it's been costly, but it works.
So we just keep old Betsy running and, you know, maybe we could become more inefficient.
There's no, like, there's the value of the waste, the overabundance, the superfluousness.
Like, that has its own function.
Makes me think of, like, the decadence of the fruit, right?
Of, like, in the beginning of the, is that the, um, Beyond Good and Evil?
Yeah, Beyond Good and Evil, I think.
Yeah, Beyond Good and Evil.
My fruit is too rough for you, don't blame the tree.
Yeah, but, like, but it's also that the tree, like, yields so much fruit and so much rot and so much decadence.
And then, but the one little interesting thing that comes out of it made all of that waste worthwhile.
And then, and then, and then, and then, and, and then, and then, and then, and then.